Magrathea--Scheduling Virtual Grids with Preemption

Jiri Denemark, Mirek Ruda

Virtual clusters, virtual grid or cloud computing have recently become
well-known names for utilizing a single technology in grids---virtualization.
Virtualization provides users with more flexible grid environment, where each
of them can use her own environment, often optimized and tailored for her
applications. This makes grids very flexible for end users. The price which is
paid for higher flexibility is a slightly higher overhead and more scheduling
complexity. However, using preemption it may enable resource-efficient
coexistence of long-running jobs with services which only occasionally need to
be awakened while consuming large portion of system resources.

In this paper we describe the Magrathea system we have developed for enabling
a batch scheduling system to schedule jobs into virtual machines and how
various types of preemption techniques with respect to Xen virtual machine
monitor may be used for running services or to allow scheduling of high
priority jobs. Techniques, such as suspending/freezing a virtual machine and
reducing memory and CPU power usable to a virtual machine are described
together with their advantages and disadvantages. Preemption overhead, speed
of preemption and resumption under different conditions including large memory
and CPU intensive computations are presented together with solutions we have
developed for the Magrathea system to reduce the overall overhead. Our work is
also compared to related work of others, such as Nimbus (or Virtual
Workspaces) or OpenNebula.

In the future work, we will concentrate on integrating the Magrathea system
with a virtual cluster system for enabling seamless coexistence between
virtual clusters and normal jobs and allowing a single scheduler to manage
both entities at the same time to achieve better resource efficiency.

